upgrade Job Declaration and Mining Protocols (#121)
stratum-mining/sv2-spec: 06-Job-Declaration-Protocol.md

This fallback strategy incentivizes honesty on Pool side, otherwise it will lose hashrate by rejecting Shares for Custom Job that was already acknowledged to be valid.

## 6.3 Job Declaration Modes

### 6.3.1 Coinbase-only Mode

Under Coinbase-only mode:

> - JDS allocates `mining_job_token` to JDC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- JDS allocates `mining_job_token` to JDC (`AllocateMiningJobToken` / `AllocateMiningJobToken.Success`).
```

- proposed work is acknowledged as valid by Pool via `SetCustomMiningJob.Success`.
- the `DeclareMiningJob` message is never used.
- if a valid block is found, JDC propagates it unilaterally.

![](./img/jd_coinbase_mode.png)

As soon as JDC has:
- a token (allocated by JDS), so it can use it to identify some unique work that it wants to advertise
- a new template

It SHOULD start sending the jobs downstream for hashing right away. The proof-of-work (shares) SHOULD be cached until JDC receives an acknowledgement via `SetCustomMiningJob.Success`.

We call this **optimistic mining**.

### 6.3.2 Full-Template Mode

Under Full-Template mode:
- JDS allocates `mining_job_token` to JDC (`AllocateMiningJobToken` / `AllocateMiningJobToken.Success`).
- JDC sends `DeclareMiningJob` to JDS (containing the `txid` of every transaction in the template).
- JDS could potentially request for JDC to reveal `txdata` (via `ProvideMissingTransactions`).
- JDS acknowledges proposed work via `DeclareMiningJob.Success`.
- JDC notifies work to Pool via `SetCustomMiningJob`, acknowledged via `SetCustomMiningJob.Success`.

> - if a valid block is found, both JDS and JDS propagate it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if a valid block is found, both JDC and JDS propagate it.
```

![](./img/jd_template_mode.png)

Similarly to Coinbase-only, as soon as JDC has:
- a token (allocated by JDS), so it can use it to identify some unique work that it wants to advertise
- a new template

It SHOULD do optimistic mining by sending the jobs downstream for hashing right away. The proof-of-work (shares) SHOULD be cached until JDC receives an acknowledgement via `SetCustomMiningJob.Success`.

### 6.3.3 Coinbase-only vs Full-Template

The table below shows a comparison between the two Sv2 Job Declation Modes:

|                                     | Coinbase-only | Full-Template |
|-------------------------------------|-|-|

> | knowledge of fee revenue            | JDC and JDS | JDC and JDS |

Reviewer: Can JDS really check the knowledge of fee revenue under Coinbase-only?

Author: hmm yeah, it cannot

Pool will know because of `SetCustomMiningJob`, but JDS will not

Author: |                                     | Coinbase-only | Full-Template |
|-------------------------------------|-|-|
| knowledge of fee revenue            | JDC and Pool | JDC and JDS (on behalf of Pool) |
| knowledge of txdata on the template | JDC | JDC and JDS (on behalf of Pool) |
| block propagation                   | JDC | JDC and JDS (on behalf of Pool) |

does this sound right to you?

Author: interestingly, this has some strong correlation with the clarifications I was aiming at here

https://github.com/stratum-mining/sv2-spec/pull/121/commits/9e2fa4dcb5e38e82ecc3fb03453b4c5c6c3768d5#r2021894148

Reviewer: That's perfect imo

Under Coinbase-only mode:
- JDS allocates `mining_job_token` to JDC (`AllocateMiningJobToken` / `AllocateMiningJobToken.Success`).
- Pool evaluates fee revenue of some proposed work (uniquely identified by `mining_job_token`) by looking at the coinbase.
- JDC never reveals the tx data contained in the template (in other words, the transaction set).
- proposed work is acknowledged as valid by Pool via `SetCustomMiningJob.Success`.
- the `DeclareMiningJob` message is never used.
- if a valid block is found, JDC propagates it unilaterally.

In other words, Pool + JDS operating under Coinbase-only mode do not require to ever know which transactions are included in the miner template, preserving the privacy around the miner's mempool.

This leaves Pool arguably vulnerable to an attack where miner declares a coinbase with some fee revenue while one of the following situations is true:
- the template actually has a different fee revenue.
- the template has invalid transactions.

> This potential attack vector has similar incentives to block-witholding, and acts as a strong disincentive for Pool + JDS to adopt Coinbase-only mode.

Author: thanks! clarified in 3ac918d8adb4b612d538617691e8620fb2226c90

> This could however be mitigated with Zero-Knowledge-Proof based protocol extensions, where JDC proves that the fee revenue on the coinbase belongs to a valid template, without ever revealing the template itself.

Author: @TheBlueMatt what are your thoughts here?

Author: upon reflection, the ZKP extension sounds very MEVil

deployment of a ZKP-enabled JDC would require highly specialized software (and perhaps also hardware for proofs)

but if ZKP extension is not on the table, the attack vector remains unmitigated

cc @GitGab19

Author: Options I can see for moving forward:
- leave coinbase-only with attack vector documented, but don't suggest ZKP (as it encourages MEVil)
- kill coinbase-only and force Sv2 JDP to always declare txs (leaving fallback as the only recourse to censorship)

| mining_job_token                    | B0_255    | Token that makes the client eligible for committing a mining job for approval/transaction declaration or for identifying custom mining job on mining connection.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| coinbase_output_max_additional_size | U32       | The maximum additional serialized bytes which the pool will add in coinbase transaction outputs. See discussion in the Template Distribution Protocol's CoinbaseOutputDataSize message for more details.                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | async_mining_allowed                | BOOL      | If true, the mining_job_token can be used immediately on a mining connection in the SetCustomMiningJob message, even before DeclareMiningJob and DeclareMiningJob.Success messages have been sent and received. If false, Job Declarator MUST use this token for DeclareMiningJob only. <br>This MUST be true when SetupConnection.flags had REQUIRES_ASYNC_JOB_MINING set. |

Author: by simply allowing the connection to be established or not

when JDC sends `SetupConnection`, the `DECLARE_TX_DATA` bit flag is used to signal that it consents to revealing the txs... then it's up to JDS to decide whether this is ok or not

so we have 4 possible scenarios:

| | JDS allows Coinbase-only mode | JDS does NOT allow Coinbase-only mode |
|-|-|-|
| JDC sets `DECLARE_TX_DATA` | `SetupConnection.Success` | `SetupConnection.Success` |
| JDC does NOT set `DECLARE_TX_DATA` | `SetupConnection.Success` | `SetupConnection.Error` (`unsupported-feature-flags`) |

do you feel this still leaves room for unspecified scenarios?

> | async_mining_allowed                | BOOL      | If true, the mining_job_token can be used immediately on a mining connection in the SetCustomMiningJob message, even before DeclareMiningJob and DeclareMiningJob.Success messages have been sent and received. If false, Job Declarator MUST use this token for DeclareMiningJob only. <br>This MUST be true when SetupConnection.flags had REQUIRES_ASYNC_JOB_MINING set. |

Author: I guess this is heavily based under the assumption that JDS will either operate under Coinbase-only OR Full-Template, but not BOTH at the same time.

If we want to allow for JDS to operate under both at the same time, then I see how `DECLARE_TX_DATA` is not sufficient, as JDC wouldn't know under which mode the token is supposed to be used.

So I guess the question is: does this scenario make sense? Can JDS ever allow for both Coinbase-only and Full-Template at the same time? TBH it doesn't really make much sense in my head, but maybe I have some blindspot.

> | async_mining_allowed                | BOOL      | If true, the mining_job_token can be used immediately on a mining connection in the SetCustomMiningJob message, even before DeclareMiningJob and DeclareMiningJob.Success messages have been sent and received. If false, Job Declarator MUST use this token for DeclareMiningJob only. <br>This MUST be true when SetupConnection.flags had REQUIRES_ASYNC_JOB_MINING set. |

Author: @GitGab19 what are your thoughts here?

> | async_mining_allowed                | BOOL      | If true, the mining_job_token can be used immediately on a mining connection in the SetCustomMiningJob message, even before DeclareMiningJob and DeclareMiningJob.Success messages have been sent and received. If false, Job Declarator MUST use this token for DeclareMiningJob only. <br>This MUST be true when SetupConnection.flags had REQUIRES_ASYNC_JOB_MINING set. |

Reviewer: I also think it doesn't make too much sense, but maybe @Fi3 meant something different so it's better to get clarifications from him on this

> | async_mining_allowed                | BOOL      | If true, the mining_job_token can be used immediately on a mining connection in the SetCustomMiningJob message, even before DeclareMiningJob and DeclareMiningJob.Success messages have been sent and received. If false, Job Declarator MUST use this token for DeclareMiningJob only. <br>This MUST be true when SetupConnection.flags had REQUIRES_ASYNC_JOB_MINING set. |

Author: > If we want to allow for JDS to operate under both at the same time, then I see how DECLARE_TX_DATA is not sufficient, as JDC wouldn't know under which mode the token is supposed to be used.

> So I guess the question is: does this scenario make sense? Can JDS ever allow for both Coinbase-only and Full-Template at the same time? TBH it doesn't really make much sense in my head, but maybe I have some blindspot.

I guess I should retract what I said here.

it doesn't matter that JDS supports both modes.

if JDC sends `SetupConnection` with `DECLARE_TX_DATA` bit enabled, then it assumes the connection is operating under Full Template mode (and all tokens are allocated are allocated with that in mind)

> 

Author: #86 is already doing it, so I intentionally left it out of this PR

| version                     | U32                   | Version header field. To be later modified by BIP320-consistent changes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| prev_hash                   | U256                  | Chain tip that the template is based on. JDS SHOULD accept templates based on different tips, as long as they are on the best block height. JDS MUST reject templates based on old tips.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

> | coinbase_tx_prefix         | B0_64K                 | The coinbase transaction nVersion field                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| coinbase_tx_prefix         | B0_64K                 | The first part of the coinbase transaction (not including extranonce)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

> | coinbase_tx_suffix         | B0_64K                 | Up to 8 bytes (not including the length byte) which are to be placed at the beginning of the coinbase field in the coinbase transaction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| coinbase_tx_suffix         | B0_64K                 | The second part of the coinbase transaction (after extranonce)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

> | prev_hash                   | U256                  | Chain tip that the template is based on. JDS SHOULD accept templates based on different tips, as long as they are on the best block height. JDS MUST reject templates based on old tips.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Author: what would be the rationale?

I assume you want to give room for a scenario where JDS is allowed to ignore `prev_hash` on `DeclareMiningJob`, which leaves us with the following possibilities:

| | JDS does care about `prev_hash` | JDS does NOT care about `prev_hash` |
|-|-|-|
| `DeclareMiningJob` sets `prev_hash`  | JDS verifies `prev_hash` | JDS ignores `prev_hash` |
| `DeclareMiningJob` does NOT set `prev_hash` | `DeclareMiningJob.Error` (`invalid-job-param-value-prev-hash`) | - |

is that correct?

> | prev_hash                   | U256                  | Chain tip that the template is based on. JDS SHOULD accept templates based on different tips, as long as they are on the best block height. JDS MUST reject templates based on old tips.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Reviewer: The `prev_hash` here is needed just to let the JDS check that the declared job is built on a valid tip (and not on an old one).

| tx_hash_list               | SEQ0_64K[B0_255] | List of hashes of the transaction set contained in the template. JDS checks the list against its mempool and requests missing txs via `ProvideMissingTransactions`. Does not include the coinbase transaction (as there is no corresponding full data for it yet).                                                                                                                                                          |

> | tx_hash_list_hash           | U256                  | SHA256 hash of the list of full txids, concatenated in the same sequence as they are declared in tx_hash_list                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Author: for a moment I had the same thought, but then I considered that this could be a "checksum" of the tx list?

let's leave it here so that others can provide more input

| coinbase_tx_prefix         | B0_64K                 | The first part of the coinbase transaction (not including extranonce)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| coinbase_tx_suffix         | B0_64K                 | The second part of the coinbase transaction (after extranonce)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | tx_ids_list               | SEQ0_64K[B0_255] | List of hashes of the transaction set contained in the template. JDS checks the list against its mempool and requests missing txs via `ProvideMissingTransactions`. Does not include the coinbase transaction (as there is no corresponding full data for it yet).                                                                                                                                                          |

Author: fixed to `SEQ0_64K[U256]`, thanks for spotting

| excess_data                 | B0_64K                | Extra data which the Pool may require to validate the work (as defined in the Template Distribution Protocol)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

### 6.4.5 `DeclareMiningJob.Success` (Server -> Client)

A response sent by JDS acknowledging some Custom Job declaration.

JDS MAY request txdata via `ProvideMissingTransactions` before making this commitment.

> Since JDS could be third party (not necessarily integrated to Pool), `new_mining_job_token` MAY carry a cryptographic commitment from JDS (while also still committing to the corresponding `SetCustomMiningJob` message).

Reviewer: Why did you change this? 

Actually I don't get what the entire parenthesis mean

Reviewer: I like it 👍

| prev hash                               | U256      | Hash of the last block                                                                                  |
| nonce                                   | U32       | Nonce leading to the hash being submitted                                                               |
| ntime                                   | U32       | The nTime field in the block header.                                                                    |

> | nbits                                   | U32       | The nBits field in the block header.                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: The Template Provider does not use nbits, and it doesn't make sense I think.

Author: did you write this under the assumption that JDC would send this `SubmitSolution` to TP?

this `SubmitSolution` is being sent by JDC to JDS, not TP

it allows JDS to reconstruct the block before propagating it

Reviewer 2: Yes. In any case it doesn't matter, it's just a description update.

> | version                                 | U32       | Version header field.                                                                                   |

Reviewer 2: The Template Provider uses the version field already and the Bitcoin Core interface supports it. This was somehow forgotten in the spec?

Reviewer 2: It looks like I confused this with the other `SubmitSolution` message.
